# [4/15] Algebra II Notes

#### Main Theorem of Galois Theory

From last time,
$$
H \leq \text{Gal}(E/F) \mapsto E^H
$$

$$
\text{Gal}(E/K) \leftarrow K = E^{\text{Gal(E/K)}}
$$

**Theorem:** The following theorem is composed of three parts

1. $\text{Gal}(E/K_2) \leq \text{Gal}(E/K_1) \iff F \leq K_1 \leq K_2 \leq E$

2. $\# H = [E : E^H], \;[E:K] = \#\text{Gal}(E/K)$ 
3. Normal subgroups correspond to field extensions

$$
\text{Gal}(E/K) \lhd \text{Gal}(E/F)  \iff F \leq K \text{ a normal field extension}
$$

**Remark:** A normal field extension $\iff$ splitting field of some polynomial.

**Proof:** Recall, there are $3$ equivalent conditions for $F \leq K$ to be normal.

- For every $K \leq L$ and any $\psi: K \rightarrow L$, $\Im(\psi) \leq K$ 
- If $F \leq K$ is normal, $\implies \forall \sigma \in \text{Gal}(E/F) \implies \sigma(K) = K$. For all elements $\tau \in \text{Gal}(E/K)$,  

$$
\sigma^{-1} \tau \sigma \implies \substack{K \;\rightarrow^{\sigma|_K}\; K\;\rightarrow^{\text{id}}\; K \;\rightarrow^{\sigma^{-1}|_K}\; K
\\ \vdots \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\vdots \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\vdots \;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\;\vdots 
\\ E\;\; \rightarrow^{\sigma} \;\;\;E \rightarrow^{\tau} \;\;\;E\rightarrow^{\sigma^{-1}} \;\;\;E
}
$$

$$
\implies \sigma^{-1}\tau\sigma \in \text{Gal}(E/K)  \lhd \text{Gal}(E/F) \quad \quad \forall \sigma \in \text{Gal}(E/F), \forall \tau \in \text{Gal}(E/K)
$$

----

**Theorem:** (Fundamental Theorem of Algebra) Every $f \in \mathbb{C}[x]\backslash \mathbb{C}$ has a root.

**Remark:** We know the following facts about $\mathbb{R}$ 

- Every $\alpha \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$ has a real square root
- Every odd degree $f \in \mathbb{R}[x]$​ has a root

-----

**Lemma 1:** $\mathbb{C}$ has no degree $2$ field extensions.

**Proof:** (Lemma 1) Suppose $\mathbb{C} \leq E$ such that $[E : \mathbb{C}] = 2$. 

Now, take $\alpha \in E\backslash \mathbb{C} \implies 1 < \deg \text{irr}(\alpha, \mathbb{C}) \leq 2 \implies \deg \text{irr} (\alpha, \mathbb{C}) = 2$. By the quadratic formula, we have that
$$
\frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$
This tells us that every degree $2$ polynomial over $\mathbb{C}$ has a root $\implies$ the polynomial is not irreducible, a contradiction.

**Lemma 2:** $\mathbb{R}$​ has no extensions of odd degree! 

------

**Proof:** (Main Theorem) Start with the following relation.
$$
\mathbb{R} \leq \mathbb{C} \leq E \implies [E:R] = [E:\mathbb{C}][\mathbb{C}: \mathbb{R}] = 2^k \text{m} \quad \quad \text{ where }2 \nmid m
$$
Now, consider the Sylow $2$ group $H \subset \text{Gal}(E/\mathbb{R})$. By the main theorem of Galois theory,
$$
[E : E^H] = 2^k \quad \text{ and } \quad [E^H : \mathbb{R}] = m \text{ where }m\text{ is odd}
$$
By Lemma 2, this means that $m = 1$. This also means that $[E: \mathbb{C}] = 2^{k-1}$. 

For a group of order $p^n$, there exists subgroups of order $p^i$ for $0 \leq i \leq n$. Take $H \leq \text{Gal}(E/\mathbb{C})$ of order $2^{k-2}$ and this implies (by the main theorem of Galois Theory) that $[E^H : \mathbb{C}] = 2 \implies$ by Lemma 1, $E = \mathbb{C}$.   

Thus, we have shown that $\mathbb{C}$ is the only proper normal field extension of $\mathbb{R}$. Take $f \in \mathbb{R}[x]$, let $E = \text{splitting field of }f$ which implies that $E = \mathbb{R} \text{ or }\mathbb{C}$. In  either case, $f$ has a complex root

---

<u>Note</u>: Take $f \in \mathbb{C}[x]$. We know that
$$
f \cdot \bar{f} \in \mathbb{R}[x] \text{ and } f(\alpha ) = 0 \iff f(\alpha) \bar{f}(\alpha) = 0
$$
**Corollary: **Every $f \in \mathbb{C}$ splits into linear factors!

---

#### Modules Over Rings

<u>Note:</u> Vector spaces are modules over fields

**Definition:** Let $R$ be a ring (communtative with $+1$), an $R$ module $V$ is an abelian group with $\mu : R \times V \rightarrow V$ satisfying associativity and distributivity.

-  $1 \cdot v = v, \;\forall v \in V$
- $(a+b) v = a \cdot v + b \cdot v$ and $a( v + w ) = av + aw$ for all $a,b \in R$ and $v,w \in V$ 
- $(ab)v = a(bv)$ 

**Remark:** These are also vector space axioms since VS are specific modules over fields.

<u>Examples:</u> Consider the following examples.

- $R$ is an $R$-module
- $R^n$ is an $R$-module (free module)
- $\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z}$ is a $\mathbb{Z}$-module (not a free module)

- Any ideal in $R$ is an $R$-module

**Definition:** A <u>free module</u> is a generated by a set of basis elements that are linearly independent. 